i want to use complete the square. you can use complete the square to solve functions. it is very useful. 
with complete the square i can find a perfect square trinomial. i can rearrange the function into equal values that can be squared to produce the answer. 
i take half of the middle term which is the x coefficient and square it and add that to both sides. then i take the square root of both sides and solve for x. 


However, sometimes the quadratic formula is more appropriate.
with the quadratic formula i can break down functions into their different parts. the equation to use the quadratic formula is very helpful. i can plug the coefficients a, b, and c 
into the quadratic formula to solve for x. 
i can use the quadratic formula when ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero.
then x equals minus b plus or minus the square root of b square plus 4 times a times c all over 2 times a. the quadratic formula will always work even when the quadratic equation is
not factorable. 

i also want to grow up to be a math major.

i want to use algebra to solve these problems. i can use variables to pass class. you can break this into different peices.

i want to break down a function into its parts to solve them using the quadratic formula. functions are the same as equations. the plural of function is functions.

factoring the quadratic also breaks a function down. it splits it by take the equation and getting the factors. factors is the plural of factor.
if a equals 1 and if i can find a two numbers that multiply together to equal c the third term which is the constant term in the equation and that add to b the second term which is 
the x coefficient in the equation then i can factor the quadratic equation. 

the quadratic formula is an easier equation though.

if both sides of the equation are perfect square i can take the square root of each sides to solve for x. 
if you take a square root of a function you can also solve it. it is powerful math.

quadratic formula.

you can eat roots for fiber.
the square root of a variable is small.

i want to use the quadratic formula to break equations and functions into chunks.
i want to use the quadratic formula for a function.
quadratic formula.
the quadratic formula or finding the factor of a quadratic will seperate a function apart.
by using the quadratic formula i can solve for x.
if i factor a quadratic i can also break apart a function and find two different factors.

