completing the square 
from wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
redirected from complete the square 
filecompleting the square.ogv 
animation depicting the process completing the square. details animated gif version 
elementary algebra completing the square technique for converting quadratic polynomial the form 

the form 

acdotscdots mboxconstant. 
this context constant means not depending the expression inside the parenthesis the form constant. thus 

converted for some values and completing the square used solving quadratic equations 
graphing quadratic functions 
evaluating integrals calculus such gaussian integrals with linear term the exponent 
finding laplace transforms. 
mathematics completing the square often applied any computation involving quadratic polynomials. completing the square also used derive the quadratic formula. 

contents hide 
overview 
background 
basic example 
general description 
nonmonic case 
formula 
relation the graph 
solving quadratic equations 
irrational and complex roots 
nonmonic case 
other applications 
integration 
complex numbers 
idempotent matrix 
geometric perspective 
variation the technique 
example the sum positive number and its reciprocal 
example factoring simple quartic polynomial 
references 
external links 
overviewedit 
backgroundedit 
there simple formula elementary algebra for computing the square binomial 

for example 

beginalignat 
ppt 
qquad endalignat 
any perfect square the number always half the coefficient and the constant term equal basic exampleedit 
consider the following quadratic polynomial 

this quadratic not perfect square since not the square however possible write the original quadratic the sum this square and constant 

this called completing the square. 

general descriptionedit 
given any monic quadratic 

possible form square that has the same first two terms 

leftxtfrac bright tfracb. 
this square differs from the original quadratic only the value the constant term. therefore can write 

leftx tfracbright where constant. this operation known completing the square. for example 

beginalignat 
endalignat 
nonmonic caseedit 
given quadratic polynomial the form 

possible factor out the coefficient and then complete the square for the resulting monic polynomial. 

example 


beginalign 
leftx right 
endalign 
this allows write any quadratic polynomial the form 

axh formulaedit 
the result completing the square may written formula. for the general case 

axh kquadtextwherequad fracba quadtextandquad fracba. 
specifically when kquadtextwherequad fracb quadtextandquad fracb. 
the matrix case looks very similar 

xmathrmtax xmathrmtb hmathrmtax quadtextwherequad fracab quadtextandquad fracbmathrmtab 
where has symmetric. 

not symmetric the formulae for and have generalized aamathrmtb quadtextandquad hmathrmta bmathrmt aamathrmt aamathrmtb. 
relation the graphedit 
graphs quadratic functions shifted the right and graphs quadratic functions shifted the right and graphs quadratic functions shifted upward and graphs quadratic functions shifted upward and graphs quadratic functions shifted upward and the right and graphs quadratic functions shifted upward and the right and analytic geometry the graph any quadratic function parabola the xyplane. given quadratic polynomial the form 

quadtextorquad axh the numbers and may interpreted the cartesian coordinates the vertex the parabola. that the xcoordinate the axis symmetry and the minimum value maximum value the quadratic function. 

one way see this note that the graph the function parabola whose vertex the origin therefore the graph the function parabola shifted the right whose vertex shown the top figure. contrast the graph the function parabola shifted upward whose vertex shown the center figure. combining both horizontal and vertical shifts yields parabola shifted the right and upward whose vertex shown the bottom figure. 

solving quadratic equationsedit 
completing the square may used solve any quadratic equation. for example 

the first step complete the square 

next solve for the squared term 

then either 

quadtextorquad and therefore 

quadtextorquad this can applied any quadratic equation. when the has coefficient other than the first step divide out the equation this coefficient for example see the nonmonic case below. 

irrational and complex rootsedit 
unlike methods involving factoring the equation which reliable only the roots are rational completing the square will find the roots quadratic equation even when those roots are irrational complex. for example consider the equation 

completing the square gives 

then either 

sqrt quadtextorquad sqrt 
sqrtquadtextorquad sqrt. 
terser language 

sqrt. 
equations with complex roots can handled the same way. for example 

beginarrayc 
endarray 
nonmonic caseedit 
for equation involving nonmonic quadratic the first step solving them divide through the coefficient for example 

beginarrayc 
tfracx leftxtfracright tfrac leftxtfracright tfrac xtfrac tfrac quadtextorquad xtfrac tfrac tfrac quadtextorquad endarray 
other applicationsedit 
integrationedit 
completing the square may used evaluate any integral the form 

intfracdxaxbxc 
using the basic integrals 

intfracdxx fracalnleftfracxaxaright quadtextandquad 
intfracdxx fracaarctanleftfracxaright for example consider the integral 

intfracdxx completing the square the denominator gives 

intfracdxx intfracdxx this can now evaluated using the substitution which yields 

intfracdxx fracarctanleftfracxrightc. 
complex numbersedit 
consider the expression 

where and are complex numbers and are the complex conjugates and respectively and real number. using the identity can rewrite this which clearly real quantity. this because 


beginalign 
zbzb 
zbzb 
endalign 
another example the expression 

where and are real numbers with and may expressed terms the square the absolute value complex number. define 

sqrtax sqrtb then 


beginalign 
sqrtax sqrtbysqrtax sqrtby 
isqrtabxy isqrtbayx iby 
endalign 
idempotent matrixedit 
matrix idempotent when idempotent matrices generalize the idempotent properties and the completion the square method addressing the equation 

shows that some idempotent matrices are parametrized circle the abplane 

the matrix beginpmatrixa endpmatrix will idempotent provided which upon completing the square becomes 

tfrac tfrac the abplane this the equation circle with center and radius geometric perspectiveedit 
completing the square.svg 
consider completing the square for the equation 

since represents the area square with side length and represents the area rectangle with sides and the process completing the square can viewed visual manipulation rectangles. 

simple attempts combine the and the rectangles into larger square result missing corner. the term added each side the above equation precisely the area the missing corner whence derives the terminology completing the square. 

variation the techniqueedit 
conventionally taught completing the square consists adding the third term get square. there are also cases which one can add the middle term either get square. 

example the sum positive number and its reciprocaledit 
writing 


beginalign 
over leftx over xright 
leftsqrtx over sqrtxright 
endalign 
show that the sum positive number and its reciprocal always greater than equal the square real expression always greater than equal zero which gives the stated bound and here achieve just when causing the square vanish. 

example factoring simple quartic polynomialedit 
consider the problem factoring the polynomial 

this the middle term thus get 

beginalign texta difference two squares 
endalign 
the last line being added merely follow the convention decreasing degrees terms. 

