some quadratics are fairly simple solve because they are the form somethingwithx squared equals some number and then you take the square root both sides. 

example would sqrt 
sqrt 
sqrt and sqrt 

unfortunately most quadratics dont come neatly squared like this. for your average everyday quadratic you first have use the technique completing the square rearrange the quadratic into the neat squared part equals number format demonstrated above. for example 

find the xintercepts first off remember that finding the xintercepts means setting equal zero and solving for the xvalues this question really asking you solve this the original problem. move the loose number over the other side. divide through whatever multiplied the squared term. 
take half the coefficient dont forget the sign the xterm and square it. add this square both sides the equation. 

convert the lefthand side squared form and simplify the righthand side. this where you use that sign that you kept track earlier. you plug into the middle the parenthetical part. 

squareroot both sides remembering the the righthand side. simplify necessary. sqrt 
solve for sqrt 
remember that the means that you have two values for sqrt and sqrt 
the answer can also written rounded form advertisement 



you will need rounded form for real life answers word problems and for graphing. but warning most other cases you should assume that the answer should exact form complete with all the square roots. 

when you complete the square make sure that you are careful with the sign the xterm when you multiply onehalf. you lose that sign you can get the wrong answer the end because youll forget what goes inside the parentheses. also dont sloppy and wait the plusminus sign until the very end. your tests you wont have the answers the back and you will likely forget put the plusminus into the answer. besides theres reason ticking off your instructor doing something wrong when its simple right. the same note make sure you draw the square root sign necessary when you square root both sides. dont wait until the answer the back the book reminds you that you meant put the square root symbol there. you get the habit being sloppy youll only hurt yourself 

solve completing the square. 
the same procedure above exactly the same order. study tip always working these problems exactly the same way will help you remember the steps when youre taking your tests. copyright elizabeth stapel all rights reserved 

this the original equation. move the loose number over the other side. take half the xterm that divide two and dont forget the sign and square it. add this square both sides the equation. completingthesquare animation 
convert the lefthand side squared form. simplify the righthand side. squareroot both sides. remember the righthand side. solve for remember that the gives you two solutions. simplify necessary. 
you are not consistent with remembering put your plusminus soon you squareroot both sides then this example the type exercise where youll get yourself trouble. youll write your answer and have idea how they got because you wont have square root symbol reminding you that you meant put the plusminus in. that youre sloppy these easier problems will embarrass you 
elementary algebra completing the square technique for converting quadratic polynomial the form 

the form 

acdotscdots mboxconstant. 
this context constant means not depending the expression inside the parenthesis the form constant. thus 

converted for some values and completing the square used solving quadratic equations 
graphing quadratic functions 
evaluating integrals calculus such gaussian integrals with linear term the exponent 
finding laplace transforms. 
mathematics completing the square often applied any computation involving quadratic polynomials. completing the square also used derive the quadratic formula. 
completing the square where ... 
... take quadratic equation like this and turn into this 
axd for those you hurry can tell you that 
and 

but you have time let show you how complete the square yourself. 

completing the square 

say have simple expression like bx. having twice the same expression can make life hard. what can well with little inspiration from geometry can convert like this 

completing the square geometry 

you can see can rearranged nearly into square ... 

... and can complete the square with algebra looks like this 

complete the square 
adding can complete the square. 

and has only once which easier use. 

keeping the balance 

now ... cant just add without also subtracting too otherwise the whole value changes. 

lets see how properly with example 

start with 
this case 

complete the square 


also subtract the new term 


simplify and are done. 


the result 

and now only appears once and our job done 

shortcut approach 

let look the result want when expand get now can force answer 

know that must end must next see that must become must and get the same result above 



now let look useful application solving quadratic equations ... 

solving general quadratic equations completing the square 

can complete the square solve quadratic equation find where equal zero. 

but general quadratic equation can have coefficient front but that easy deal with ... just divide the whole equation first then carry bax steps 

now can solve quadratic equation steps 

step divide all terms the coefficient step move the number term the right side the equation. 
step complete the square the left side the equation and balance this adding the same value the right side the equation. 
now have something that looks like which can solved rather easily 

step take the square root both sides the equation. 
step subtract the number that remains the left side the equation find examples 

here are two examples 

example solve step can skipped this example since the coefficient step move the number term the right side the equation 

step complete the square the left side the equation and balance this adding the same number the right side the equation. 

step take the square root both sides the equation 

decimals 
step subtract from both sides 

and here interesting and useful thing. 

the end step had the equation 

gives the vertex turning point graph 


example solve step divide all terms step move the number term the right side the equation 

step complete the square the left side the equation and balance this adding the same number the right side the equation 

step take the square root both sides the equation 

decimals 
step subtract from both sides other words add why complete the square 

why complete the square when can just use the quadratic formula solve quadratic equation 

well one reason given above where the new form not only shows the vertex but makes easier solve. 

there are also times when the form may part larger question and rearranging axd makes the solution easier because only appears once. 

for example may itself function like cosz and rearranging may open path better solution. 

also completing the square the first step the derivation the quadratic formula 

just think another tool your mathematics toolbox. 

equation which one side perfect square trinomial can easily solved taking the square root each side. 
consider the example the right 




this method solution that the basis process called completing the square. 

consider the equation our solution strategy will force perfect square trinomial the form 

the left hand side the equation. 
this method forcing the existence perfect square trinomial completing the square. 

steps for completing the square 

sure that the coefficient the highest power one. 
not divide each term that value create leading coefficient one. 


move the constant term the right hand side. 


prepare add the needed value create the perfect square trinomial. sure balance the equation. the boxes may help you remember balance. 
find the needed value for the perfect square trinomial take half the coefficient the middle term xterm square and add that value both sides the equation. 

factor the perfect square trinomial. 
take the square root each side and solve. remember consider both plus and minus results. 






examples solve each example completing the square. 



keep all related terms one side. move the constant the right. 
get ready create perfect square the left. balance the equation. 

take half the xterm coefficient and square it. add this value both sides. 

factor and write the perfect square the left. 

take the square root both sides. sure allow for both plus and minus. 

solve for this equation needs some rearranging. 
divide through create the leading coefficient for keep all related terms one side. move the constant the right. 

get ready create perfect square the left. balance the equation. 

take half the pterm coefficient and square it. add this value both sides. 

factor and write the perfect square the left. 

take the square root both sides. sure allow for both plus and minus. 

solve for sure express the negative radical imaginary number. 





there are other applications completing the square. the section equations circles will see how completing the square used change the equation circle from general form centerradius form. 
lesson saw technique called completing the square. will now see how apply solving quadratic equation. 
completing the square 
try solve this quadratic equation factoring 
cannot. therefore will complete the square. will make the quadratic into the form 
this technique valid only when the coefficient transpose the constant term the right 
add square number both sides add the square half the coefficient this case add the square half that add the square which the lefthand side now the perfect square half the coefficient that equation has the form 
which implies 
square root. 
therefore 
square root 

square root. 
that the solutions are the conjugate pair 
square root square root. 
for method checking these roots see the theorem the sum and product the roots lesson topics precalculus 
lesson there are examples and problems which the coefficient odd. also some the quadratics below have complex roots and some involve simplifying radicals. 
problem solve each quadratic equation completing the square. 
see the answer pass your cursor from left right 
over the colored area. 
cover the answer again click refresh reload. 
the problem yourself first 

square root square root 

square root square root 
square root 

isquare root 
square root square root 

square root square root 
problem find two numbers whose sum and whose product according the theorem the sum and products the roots they are the solutions problem the quadratic formula 
here formula for finding the roots any quadratic. proved completing the squareexclamation other words the quadratic formula completes the square for us. 
theorem. then 
square root 
the two roots are the right. one root has the plus sign the other the minus sign. the square root term irrational then the two roots are conjugate pair. 
call those two roots and then the quadratic can factored will prove the quadratic formula below. 
example use the quadratic formula solve this quadratic equation 
solution. have therefore according the formula 
square root 

square root 

square root 

square root 
that those are the two roots. and they are rational. when the roots are rational could have solved the equation factoring which always the simplest method. 
completing the square 

this another way solve quadratic equation the equation will not factorise. 
often convenient write algebraic expression square plus another term. the other term found dividing the coefficient and squaring it. 
any quadratic equation can rearranged that can solved this way. 
have look this example. 
example 
rewrite square plus another term. 
the coeffient dividing and squaring gives example 
have seen the previous example that work out now try one for yourself. 
question 
solve toggle answer 

example 
rewrite rewrite get its own. 
the coefficient divide and square get completing the square 
mctycompletingsquare 
this unit consider how quadratic expressions can written equivalent form using the technique known completing the square. this technique has applications number areas but will see example its use solving quadratic equation. 
order master the techniques explained here vital that you undertake plenty practice exercises that all this becomes second nature. help you achieve this the unit includes substantial number such exercises. 
after reading this text andor viewing the video tutorial this topic you should able write quadratic expression complete square plus minus constant 
solve quadratic equation completing the square 
this unit look process called completing the square. can used write quadratic expression alternative form. later the unit will see how can used solve quadratic equation. 
some simple equations 
example 
consider the quadratic equation can solve this taking the square root both sides 
remembering that when take the square root there will two possible answers one positive 
and one negative. this often written the briefer form this process for solving very straightforward particularly because 
square number complete square. this means that the result squaring another number term this case the result squaring complete square the result squaring simply squarerooting both sides solves the problem. 
example 
consider the equation again can solve this taking the square root both sides 
this example the righthand side not square number. but can still solve the equation the same way. usually better leave your answer this exact form rather than use calculator give decimal approximation. 
example 
suppose wish solve the equation 
again can solve this taking the square root both sides. the lefthand side complete 
square because results from squaring adding each side can obtain the values for could write this the briefer form www.mathcentre.ac.uk 
mathcentre 

example 
suppose wish solve 
again the lefthand side complete square. taking the square root both sides 
subtracting from each side can obtain the values for exercises 
solve the following quadratic equations 
the basic technique 
now suppose wanted try apply the method used the three previous examples each the previous examples the lefthand side was complete square. this means that each case took the form this not the case now and cannot just take the squareroot. what try instead rewrite the expression that becomes complete square hence the name completing the square. 
observe that complete squares such can expanded follows 
complete squares 
key point 
xaxa xaxa 
xaxa xaxa 
www.mathcentre.ac.uk mathcentre 
will use these expansions help complete the square the following examples. 
example 
consider the quadratic expression 
compare this with the complete square 
axa 
clearly the coefficients both expressions are the same. 
would like match the term with the term this note that must that recall that 
terms have now written the expression complete square plus minus constant. have completed the square. important note that the constant term brackets half the coefficient the original expression. 
example 
suppose wish complete the square for the quadratic expression want try rewrite this that takes the form complete square plus minus constant. compare 
with the standard form axa 
the coefficients are the same. make the coefficients the same must choose recall that then with axa axa then with this means that when trying complete the square for can replace the first two 
this means that when trying complete the square for can replace the first two terms have now written the expression complete square plus minus constant. have completed the square. again note that the constant term brackets half the coefficient the original expression. 
www.mathcentre.ac.uk mathcentre 
example 
suppose wish complete the square for the quadratic expression this means want try rewrite that has the form complete square plus minus constant. the examples have just worked through have seen how this can done comparing with the standard forms and would like able complete the square without writing down all the working did the previous examples. the key point remember that the number the bracket the complete square half the coefficient the quadratic expression. 

with know that the complete square will this has the same 
and terms the given quadratic expression but the constant term different. must balance the constant term subtracting the extra constant that our complete square has 

introduced that and putting the constant term from our quadratic that putting this together have 

finish off just combine the two constants 
and xxx 
have now written the expression complete square plus minus constant. have completed the square. again note that the constant term brackets half the 

coefficient the original expression. 
the explanation given above really just outline our thought process when complete the square practice would not write all down. would probably straight equation the ability this will come with practice. 
exercises 
completing the square for the following quadratic expressions 
cases which the coefficient not now know how complete the square for quadratic expressions for which the coefficient when faced with quadratic expression where the coefficient not can still use this technique but put extra step first factor out this coefficient. 
www.mathcentre.ac.uk mathcentre 
suppose wish complete the square for the expression begin factoring out the coefficient this case does not matter that not 
factor can still this writing the expression now the expression brackets quadratic with coefficient equal and can proceed before. the number the complete square will half the coefficient will 

use then must balance the constant term just did before subtracting 

the extra constant have introduced that and putting the constant from the 
quadratic expression that the arithmetic tidy the constants bit messy 



xxx 
putting all this together 
and finally 

and have completed the square. 
this the completing the square form for quadratic expression for which the coefficient not exercises 
completing the square for the following quadratic expressions 
www.mathcentre.ac.uk mathcentre 

summary the process 
will useful you can get used doing this process automatically. the method can summarised follows 
key point 
factor out the coefficient then work with the quadratic expression which has coefficient equal check the coefficient the new quadratic expression and take half this the number that goes into the complete square bracket 
balance the constant term subtracting the square the number from step and putting the constant from the quadratic expression 
the rest arithmetic that may often involve fractions 
solving quadratic equation completing the square 
let return now problem posed earlier. want solve the equation write this note that the coefficient there need take out any common factor. 
completing the square for quadratic expression the lefthand side 
have solved the quadratic equation completing the square. 
produce equation have noted that the coefficient the quadratic expression the number the complete square bracket must then have balanced the constant subtracting the square this number and putting the constant from the quadratic get equation just the arithmetic which this example quite straightforward. 
www.mathcentre.ac.uk mathcentre 

exercises 
use completing the square solve the following quadratic equations 
give your answers either fractions the form answers 
fxgxhx 
