square root 
from wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
square roots redirects here. for the music festival see square roots. for the documentary see square roots the story spongebob squarepants. 
redirects here. for the similar symbol see check mark. 

the mathematical expression the principal square root mathematics square root number number such that other words number whose square the result multiplying the number itself for example and are square roots because every nonnegative real number has unique nonnegative square root called the principal square root which denoted where called the radical sign radix. for example the principal square root denoted because and nonnegative. the term whose root being considered known the radicand. the radicand the number expression underneath the radical sign this example every positive number has two square roots which positive and which negative. together these two roots are denoted see shorthand. although the principal square root positive number only one its two square roots the designation the square root often used refer the principal square root. for positive the principal square root can also written exponent notation square roots negative numbers can discussed within the framework complex numbers. more generally square roots can considered any context which notion squaring some mathematical objects defined including algebras matrices endomorphism rings etc. 

contents hide 
history 
properties and uses 
computation 
square roots negative and complex numbers 
square root imaginary number 
principal square root complex number 
algebraic formula 
notes 
square roots matrices and operators 
integral domains including fields 
rings general 
principal square roots the positive integers 
decimal expansions 
expansions other numeral systems 
periodic continued fractions 
geometric construction the square root 
see also 
notes 
references 
external links 
historyedit 
the yale babylonian collection ybc clay tablet was created between and showing and and base numbers square crossed two diagonals. 

the rhind mathematical papyrus copy from earlier berlin papyrus and other texts possibly the kahun papyrus that shows how the egyptians extracted square roots inverse proportion method. 

ancient india the knowledge theoretical and applied aspects square and square root was least old the sulba sutras dated around possibly much earlier.citation needed method for finding very good approximations the square roots and are given the baudhayana sulba sutra. aryabhata the aryabhatiya section has given method for finding the square root numbers having many digits. 

was known the ancient greeks that square roots positive whole numbers that are not perfect squares are always irrational numbers numbers not expressible ratio two integers that say they cannot written exactly where and are integers. this the theorem euclid almost certainly due theaetetus dating back circa bc. the particular case assumed date back earlier the pythagoreans and traditionally attributed hippasus.citation needed exactly the length the diagonal square with side length the chinese mathematical work writings reckoning written between and during the early han dynasty the square root approximated using excess and deficiency method which says ...combine the excess and deficiency the divisor taking the deficiency numerator multiplied the excess denominator and the excess numerator times the deficiency denominator combine them the dividend. 

mahvra thcentury indian mathematician was the first state that square roots negative numbers not exist. 

symbol for square roots written elaborate was invented regiomontanus was also used for radix indicate square roots gerolamo cardanos ars magna. 

according historian mathematics d.e. smith aryabhatas method for finding the square root was first introduced europe cataneo the symbol for the square root was first used print christoph rudolffs coss which was also the first use the thennew signs and properties and usesedit 

the graph the function made half parabola with vertical directrix. 
the principal square root function usually just referred the square root function function that maps the set nonnegative real numbers onto itself. geometrical terms the square root function maps the area square its side length. 

the square root rational and only rational number that can represented ratio two perfect squares. see square root for proofs that this irrational number and quadratic irrational for proof for all nonsquare natural numbers. the square root function maps rational numbers into algebraic numbers superset the rational numbers. 

for all real numbers sqrtx leftxright 
begincases 
mboxif mboxif endcases 
see absolute value 
for all nonnegative real numbers and sqrtxy sqrt sqrt and 

sqrt the square root function continuous for all nonnegative and differentiable for all positive denotes the squareroot function its derivative given fracsqrt the taylor series about converges for and given sqrt sumninfty fracnnnnnxn textstyle fracx fracx frac frac dots 
the square root nonnegative number used the definition euclidean norm and distance well generalizations such hilbert spaces. defines important concept standard deviation used probability theory and statistics. has major use the formula for roots quadratic equation quadratic fields and rings quadratic integers which are based square roots are important algebra and have uses geometry. square roots frequently appear mathematical formulas elsewhere well many physical laws. 

computationedit 
main article methods computing square roots 
most pocket calculators have square root key. computer spreadsheets and other software are also frequently used calculate square roots. pocket calculators typically implement efficient routines such the newtons method frequently with initial guess compute the square root positive real number. when computing square roots with logarithm tables slide rules one can exploit the identity 

eln log where and log are the natural and base logarithms. 

trialanderror one can square estimate for and raise lower the estimate until agrees sufficient accuracy. for this technique its prudent use the identity 

allows one adjust the estimate some amount and measure the square the adjustment terms the original estimate and its square. furthermore when close because the tangent line the graph function alone thus small adjustments can planned out setting cax. 

the most common iterative method square root calculation hand known the babylonian method herons method after the firstcentury greek philosopher heron alexandria who first described it. the method uses the same iterative scheme the newtonraphson method yields when applied the function fxx using the fact that its slope any point dydxfxx but predates many centuries. the algorithm repeat simple calculation that results number closer the actual square root each time repeated with its result the new input. the motivation that overestimate the square root nonnegative real number then will underestimate and the average these two numbers better approximation than either them. however the inequality arithmetic and geometric means shows this average always overestimate the square root noted below and can serve new overestimate with which repeat the process which converges consequence the successive overestimates and underestimates being closer each other after each iteration. find start with arbitrary positive start value the closer the square root the fewer the iterations that will needed achieve the desired precision. 
replace the average between and ax. 
repeat from step using this average the new value that arbitrary guess for and axn then each approximation which better for large than for small positive the convergence quadratic which means that approaching the limit the number correct digits roughly doubles each next iteration. the convergence only linear. 

using the identity 

the computation the square root positive number can reduced that number the range this simplifies finding start value for the iterative method that close the square root for which polynomial piecewiselinear approximation can used. 

the time complexity for computing square root with digits precision equivalent that multiplying two ndigit numbers. 

another useful method for calculating the square root the shifting nth root algorithm applied for square roots negative and complex numbersedit 

first leaf the complex square root 

second leaf the complex square root 

using the riemann surface the square root shown how the two leaves fit together 

the square any positive negative number positive and the square therefore negative number can have real square root. however possible work with more inclusive set numbers called the complex numbers that does contain solutions the square root negative number. this done introducing new number denoted sometimes especially the context electricity where traditionally represents electric current and called the imaginary unit which defined such that using this notation can think the square root but notice that also have and also square root convention the principal square root more generally any nonnegative number then the principal square root sqrtx sqrt the right side well its negative indeed square root since 

isqrt isqrt for every nonzero complex number there exist precisely two numbers such that the principal square root defined below and its negative. 

square root imaginary numberedit 

the square roots the complex plane 
the square root given sqrti fracsqrt ifracsqrt fracsqrti. 
this result can obtained algebraically finding and such that 

abi 
equivalently 

abi this gives the two simultaneous equations 

begincases 
endcases 
with solutions 

fracsqrt. 
the choice the principal root then gives 

fracsqrt. 
the result can also obtained using moivres formula and setting 

cosleft fracpiright isinleft fracpiright 
which produces 

beginalign 
sqrti left cosleft fracpi right isin left fracpi right right frac 
cosleft fracpi right isinleft fracpi right 
fracsqrt ileft fracsqrt right fracsqrti endalign 
principal square root complex numberedit 
find definition for the square root that allows consistently choose single value called the principal value start observing that any complex number can viewed point the plane expressed using cartesian coordinates. the same point may reinterpreted using polar coordinates the pair where the distance the point from the origin and the angle that the line from the origin the point makes with the positive real axis. complex analysis this value conventionally written rei. varphi text with varphi then define the principal square root follows 

sqrtz sqrtr varphi the principal square root function thus defined using the nonpositive real axis branch cut. the principal square root function holomorphic everywhere except the set nonpositive real numbers strictly negative reals isnt even continuous. the above taylor series for remains valid for complex numbers with the above can also expressed terms trigonometric functions 

sqrtr leftcos varphi sin varphi right sqrtr left cos fracvarphi sin fracvarphi right algebraic formulaedit 
when the number expressed using cartesian coordinates the following formula can used for the principal square root 

sqrtz sqrtfracz operatornamerez sgnoperatornameimz sqrtfracz operatornamerez 
where sgn the signum function. the sign the imaginary part the root taken the same the sign the imaginary part the original number. the real part the principal value always nonnegative. 

the other square root simply times the principal square root both roots can written pmleftsqrtfracz operatornamerez sgnoperatornameimz sqrtfracz operatornamerezright 
notesedit 
because the discontinuous nature the square root function the complex plane the following laws are not true general 

counterexample for the principal square root and counterexample for the principal square root counterexample for the principal square root similar problem appears with other complex functions with branch cuts e.g. the complex logarithm and the relations logz logw logzw logz logz which are not true general. 

wrongly assuming one these laws underlies several faulty proofs for instance the following one showing that 


beginalign 
cdot sqrt cdot sqrt 
sqrt cdot 
sqrt 

endalign 
the third equality cannot justified see invalid proof. can made hold changing the meaning that this longer represents the principal square root see above but selects branch for the square root that contains the lefthand side becomes either 

sqrt cdot sqrti cdot the branch includes sqrt cdot sqrti cdot the branch includes while the righthand side becomes 

sqrt cdot sqrt 
where the last equality consequence the choice branch the redefinition square roots matrices and operatorsedit 
main article square root matrix 
positivedefinite matrix operator then there exists precisely one positive definite matrix operator with then define general matrices may have multiple square roots even infinitude them. for example the identity matrix has infinity square roots though only one them positive definite. 

integral domains including fieldsedit 
each element integral domain has more than square roots. the difference two squares identity proved using the commutativity multiplication. and are square roots the same element then because there are zero divisors this implies where the latter means that two roots are additive inverses each other. other words the square root element exists unique sign. the only square root integral domain itself. 

field characteristic element has either one square root because each element its own additive inverse does not have any all the field finite characteristic then every element has unique square root. field any other characteristic any nonzero element either has two square roots explained above does not have any. 

given odd prime number let for some positive integer nonzero element the field with elements quadratic residue has square root fq. otherwise quadratic nonresidue. there are quadratic residues and quadratic nonresidues zero not counted either class. the quadratic residues form group under multiplication. the properties quadratic residues are widely used number theory. 

rings generaledit 
ring call element square root iff see that the square root need not unique sign general ring consider the ring mathbbzmathbbz from modular arithmetic. here the element has four distinct square roots namely and the other hand the element has square root. see also the article quadratic residue for details. 

another example provided the quaternions mathbbh which the element has infinitude square roots including and fact the set square roots exactly 

mid hence this set exactly the same size and shape the unit sphere space. 

the square root definition either zero divisor and where zero divisors not exist such quaternions and generally division algebras uniquely not necessarily true general rings where znz for any natural provides easy counterexample. 

principal square roots the positive integersedit 
decimal expansionsedit 
the square roots the perfect squares etc. are integers. all other cases the square roots positive integers are irrational numbers and therefore their decimal representations are nonrepeating decimals. 



article million digits million million million 
article million digits million 

article million digits 
million digits 
million digits 
million digits 

million digits 
million digits verified 
digits 
digits 
digits 
digits 
digits 
note that the radicand not squarefree then one can factorize for example sqrt sqrtsqrt sqrt sqrt sqrtsqrt sqrt sqrt sqrtsqrt sqrt and sqrt sqrtsqrt sqrt. 

expansions other numeral systemsedit 
the square roots the perfect squares etc. are integers. all other cases the square roots positive integers are irrational numbers and therefore their representations any standard positional notation system are nonrepeating. 

the square roots small integers are used both the sha and sha hash function designs provide nothing sleeve numbers. 

periodic continued fractionsedit 
one the most intriguing results from the study irrational numbers continued fractions was obtained joseph louis lagrange lagrange found that the representation the square root any nonsquare positive integer continued fraction periodic. that certain pattern partial denominators repeats indefinitely the continued fraction. sense these square roots are the very simplest irrational numbers because they can represented with simple repeating pattern integers. 

... 
... 

... 
... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 
... 
the square bracket notation used above sort mathematical shorthand conserve space. written more traditional notation the simple continued fraction for the square root ... looks like this 


sqrt cfrac cfrac cfrac cfrac cfrac ddots 
where the twodigit pattern repeats over and over again the partial denominators. since the above also identical the following generalized continued fractions 


sqrt cfrac cfrac cfrac cfrac cfrac ddots cfraccdot cfrac cfrac cfrac ddots. 
geometric construction the square rootedit 
the square root positive number usually defined the side length square with the area equal the given number. but the square shape not necessary for one two similar planar euclidean objects has the area times greater than another then the ratio their linear sizes square root can constructed with compass and straightedge. his elements euclid fl. gave the construction the geometric mean two quantities two different places proposition ii. and proposition vi.. since the geometric mean and sqrt one can construct sqrta simply taking the construction also given descartes his gomtrie see figure page however descartes made claim originality and his audience would have been quite familiar with euclid. 

euclids second proof book depends the theory similar triangles. let ahb line segment length with and construct the circle with diameter and let one the two intersections the perpendicular chord with the circle and denote the length then using thales theorem and the proof pythagoras theorem similar triangles triangle ahc similar triangle chb indeed both are triangle acb though dont need that but the essence the proof pythagoras theorem that ahch hchb i.e. from which conclude crossmultiplication that and finally that sqrt ab. note further that you were mark the midpoint the line segment and draw the radius length then clearly i.e. sqrt with equality and only which the arithmeticgeometric mean inequality for two variables and noted above the basis the ancient greek understanding herons method. 

another method geometric construction uses right triangles and induction can course constructed and once has been constructed the right triangle with and for its legs has hypotenuse the spiral theodorus constructed using successive square roots this manner. 

