theres magic solving quadratic equations. quadratic equations can solved factoring and also graphing. 


the factoring method solution 
lets quick review factoring. 
you need more indepth look factoring check the factoring section this site. 

there are primarily three types factoring 



common monomial 
difference squares quadratic trinomial you can factor you will able solve factorable quadratic equations. 
lets see how done. 


solve for here are the steps you should follow 

move all terms the same side the equal sign the equation set equal this places the equation standard form. 
factor the algebraic expression. 
and are called factors. these are factors the expression 
set each factor equal this process called the zero product property. the product two factors equals then either one both the factors must solve each resulting equation. 
and are called roots. these are roots the equation example 

solve for factor the common monomial. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

solve for get all terms the same side. factor the difference squares. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

solve for get all terms the same side. arrange the terms standard form. factor the quadratic trinomial. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

solve for employ product the means product the extremes crossmultiply for this proportion. 
get all terms the same side. factor the difference squares. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

solve for employ product the means product the extremes crossmultiply for this proportion. 
get all terms the same side. factor the common monomial. factor the quadratic trinomial. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

write quadratic equation the form whose roots are and the simplest answer will equation where the factors the expression are 
and create this equation. multiply. combine get answer equation. example 

the square number exceeds times the number find the numbers. 

translate the problem into mathematical equation. get all terms the same side. factor the difference squares. set each factor equal and solve for list all values example 

football the height the football reached during pass can modeled the equation where the height feet and the time seconds. how long does take for this ball reach height feet 

substitute into the equation for get all terms the same side. move terms the left side avoid working with negative leading coefficient. factor the quadratic trinomial. set each factor equal and solve for list all values that are positive. negative time should appear not considered answer. reaches height feet when time seconds ball going and seconds ball coming down. 







the graphing method solution 
quadratic equations can also solved graphing. graphing can done hand with the use graphing calculator. the locations where the graph intersects crosses the xaxis will the solutions the equation. these locations are called the roots the equation. 
quadratic equation equation the form where and and are real numbers. 

solving quadratic equations factoring 

can often factor quadratic equation into the product two binomials. are then left with equation the form where and are integers. 

the zero product property states that the product two quantities equal then least one the quantities must equal zero. thus either consequently the two solutions the equation are and example solve for thus the solution set example solve for thus the solution set example solve for thus the solution set index lessons purplemaths lessons offline form 
forums print this page printfriendly version find local tutors 




solving quadratic equations 
solving factoring page sections solving factoring taking roots completing the square using the formula graphing 


solving quadratic equations mathhelp.com 

solving quadratic equations factoring 

this lesson covers many ways solve quadratics such taking square roots completing the square and using the quadratic formula. but well start with solving factoring. 

you should already know how factor quadratics. not review factoring quadratics. the new thing here that the quadratic part equation and youre told solve for the values that make the equation true. heres how works 

solve okay this one already factored for me. but how solve this 

think multiply two things together and the result zero what can say about those two things can say that least one them must also zero. that the only way multiply and get zero multiply zero. this sometimes called the zero factor property rule principle. 

warning you cannot make this statement about any other number you can only make the conclusion about the factors one them must equal zero the product itself equals zero. the above product factors had been equal say then would still have idea what was the value either the factors would not have been able would not have been mathematically justified making any claim about the values the factors. because you can only make the conclusion one the factors must have equalled zero the product equals zero you must always have the equation the form quadratic equals zero before you can attempt solve it. 

the zero factor principle tells that least one the factors must equal zero. since least one the factors must zero ill set them eachequal zero 

this gives simple linear equations and theyre easy solve 

and this the solution theyre looking for note that means the same thing the only difference the formatting. the format moretypically used. 

one important issue should mentioned this point just with linear equations the solutions quadratic equations may verified plugging them back into the original equation and making sure that they work that they result true statement. for the above example would the following 



advertisement 



checking checking both solutions check and are thus verified being correct. 

solve this equation already the form quadratic equals zero but unlike the previous example this isnt yet factored. the quadratic must first factored because only when you multiply and get zero that you can say anything about the factors and solutions. you cant conclude anything about the individual terms the unfactored quadratic like the the because you can add lots stuff that totals zero. 

the first thing have factor 

set this equal zero 

solve each factor copyright elizabeth stapel all rights reserved 

the solution checking and both solutions check. 

solve this equation not quadratic equals zero form cant try solve yet. the first thing need get all the terms over one side with zero the other side. only then can factor and solve 

then the solution solve very common for students see this type problem and say 

cool its already factored ill set the factors equal and 
solve get and that was easy 

yeah was easy was also warning wrong. besides the fact that does not equal you should never forget that you must have quadratic equals zero before you can solve. 

tempting though may cannot set each the factors above equal the other side the equation and solve. instead first have multiply out and simplify the lefthand side then subtract the over the lefthand side and refactor. only then can solve. 

then the solution solve very common mistake that students make this type problem solve the equation for dividing off the but you cant divide zero dividing off the makes the implicit assumption that not zero. there justification for making that assumption and warning making that implicit assumption will cause you lose half your solution this problem. 

even though you are used variable factors having variables and numbers like the other factor factor can contain only variable perfectly valid factor. set the factors equal zero and solve 

then the solution solve this twoterm quadratic easier factor than were the previous quadratics can factor out both terms taking the out front. warning not divide the off not make magically disappear youll lose one your solutions 

then the solution there one other case twoterm quadratics that you can factor 

solve this equation quadratic equals zero form its ready solve. the quadratic itself difference squares ill apply the differenceofsquares formula 

then the solution note this solution may also formatted there another way work this last problem which leads the next section... 


set your expression. the standard format for the quadratic equation start ordering the terms your equation from highest lowest power just like this standard format. for example take 

will reorder this expression its easier work with simply moving the terms around 

find the factored form using one the methods below. factoring the polynomial will result two smaller expressions which can multiplied produce the original polynomial 

this example and are factors the original expression check your work multiply the factors you identified. then combine like terms and youre done. start with 

lets test multiplying the terms using foil first outer inner last obtaining 

from here can add and together since theyre like terms. know our factors are correct because get the equation started with 

learning objectives 
solve quadratic equations using factoring techniques and express the solutions set. 

introduction 

when any polynomial set equal certain value whether integer another polynomial the result equation. equation that can written the form called quadratic equation. can solve these quadratic equations using the rules algebra applying factoring techniques where necessary and using the zero product property. 

the zero product property 

the zero product property states algebraic terms course something that all have known for long time the product two numbers then least one the factors zero product property 

then either both and are this property may seem fairly obvious but has big implications for how solve quadratic equations means that have factored polynomial equal can sure that least one the factors also can use this method identify solutions for the equation. 

but were getting ahead ourselves herelets start with example quadratic equation and think about how can solve it. the equation quadratic equation because can written which fits the form with example 
problem 

solve for the problem asks solve for lets begin factoring the left side the equation. 

common factor and common factor and this point have fully factored the left side the equation. were just factoring the expression could stop here but remember that are solving the equation for heres where use the zero product property. since the entire expression equal zero know that least one the terms has equal zero. lets continue solve this problem setting each term equal zero and solving the 
equations. 


set each factor equal zero 

solve each equation 
answer 
end with two possible values for and these values are also called the roots equation. check our answers can substitute both values directly into our original equation and see get true sentence for each. 

checking checking substituting these values into the original equation produces two correct statements know that our values for are correct this quadratic equation has two roots and can use the same zero product property solve quadratic equations the form first factor the expression and then will solve for the roots. 


example 
problem 
solve for expand the term using two coefficients whose sum and whose product group terms 

pull out the common factors from each group. 

use the distributive property pull out factor. 

use the zero product property set each factor equal solve each equation. 
answer 

the roots the original equation are the solution this equation then both these values for will result true statement. skeptical substitute values and for the original equation. well wait. 

solve for showhide answer 



applying the zero product property 

when use the zero product property solve quadratic equation need make sure that the equation itself has been set zero. sometimes this will require moving terms around order make one side zero. 

example think about the equation could factor the trinomial the left side the equation but would left with the equation and this far could get all this new equation tells that two factors and when multiplied together equal setting each factor equal and then solving the equation does not help either are not looking for factors that are are looking for two factors that when multiplied together equal put another way cannot use the zero product property when there not zero one side the quadratic equation 

whats the solution here order have zero one side the equation have subtract from both sides. this means our quadratic equation goes from can factor the trinomial the left and then use the zero product property find values for the example below shows how solve quadratic equation where neither side originally equal zero. note that the factoring sequence has been shortened. 

example 
problem 

solve for the original equation has 
the right. make this side equal add both sides. 

combine like terms. 


rewrite for easier grouping and factoring. 


use the distributive property pull out the common factors the pairs terms. 


use the distributive property pull out the common factor the quadratic now completely factored. 

apply the zero product property. 
answer 
sometimes may factor quadratic equations that end looking like this know how apply the zero product property the factors and but what with the leading coefficient can apply the zero product property integer 

this situation have three factors and the zero product rule tells that the product the three factors going equal the zero the right side the equation the only way that can happen least one the three factors the left side zero. lets check each them 

the factor never going equal zero can effectively ignore one the choices. 

the factor might equal zero and find that when then does. 

the factor might equal zero and find that when then does. 

our solutions the original equation are the factor did not contribute third solution. 

solve for showhide answer 


summary 

can find the solutions roots quadratic equations setting one side equal zero factoring the polynomial and then applying the zero product property. the zero product property states that then either both and are when the product factors equals zero one more the factors must also equal zero. once the polynomial factored set each factor equal zero and solve them separately. the answers will the set possible solutions the original equation. 
factoring quadratic equations gmat math study guide 
table contents 

definitions 
basic factoring 
examples basic factoring 
reverse factoring 
translating between factored and quadratic form 
three common forms 
difference squares 
plus squared 
minus squared 
dividing zero 
solutions summary 
definitions 

quadratic equation equation that can written the form for example quadratic equation while not quadratic equation. 
factoring the process breaking apart equation into factors separate terms such that when the separate terms are multiplied together they produce the original equation. 
for example xx. this case the equation can broken apart into two factors i.e. such that when these two separate terms i.e. factors are multiplied together the result the original equation. 
basic factoring 

factoring basic quadratic equation such you must find two numbers that add i.e. this case and multiply this case. the numbers and have the properties necessary. consequently and are the two factors. 

summarize 

factoring quadratic the form look for two numbers that add and multiply examples basic factoring 

you have not done factoring years entirely new you may confused this point. however the following examples and explanation going between factored and quadratic form should clarify most confusion. 

find two numbers that add and multiply two such numbers are and since each value satisfies the equation another example 

find two numbers that add and multiply two such numbers are and since each value satisfies the equation another example 

find two numbers that add and multiply two such numbers are and since each value satisfies the equation reverse factoring 

the reverse factoring called foil which stands for first outer inner last. acquire the quadratic form from the factored form multiply the first terms then the outer terms then the inner terms and finally the last terms add each the terms together and simplify. for example 

first outer inner last 
translating between factored and quadratic form 

factoring defined above the process breaking apart equation into factors separate terms such that when the separate terms are multiplied together they produce the original equation. factoring works the following fundamental relationship 

where and are the roots solutions the quadratic equation 
example 

roots 
consequently you saw question you could quickly solve factoring follows 

since both these values make the equation true. 
three common forms 

there are three common forms that are easily factored. essential that you can recognize these three factored forms and quickly work with them 

difference squares 

for example 

plus squared 

for example 

minus squared 

for example 

dividing zero undefined 

the rules mathematics and division particular state that you cannot divide zero. consequently divided zero undefined just divided zero undefined and divided undefined. further you are factoring equation with variable the denominator any value that variable that makes the denominator zero not legitimate solution. this best explained and understood with examples. 


begin factoring the equation much possible. 
top two numbers that add and multiply are and bottom two numbers that add and multiply are and the solutions roots are since the denominator cannot equal zero both values that cause the entire denominator equal zero are not solutions but are instead values that cause the entire expression undefined. 
another example 


begin factoring the equation much possible. 
top two numbers that add and multiply are and bottom two numbers that add and multiply are and the solutions roots are since the denominator cannot equal zero both values that cause the entire denominator equal zero are not solutions but are instead values that cause the entire expression undefined. 
solutions summary 

quadratic equations can have zero one two real solutions. 

real solution 
one real solution two real solutions quadratic eq. has two answers both which will correctly solve the equation remember the foil method and this will much easier. 

learning objective edit 

solve quadratic equations factoring 

key points edit 

quadratic equation polynomial equation the second degree. general quadratic equation can written the form lot easier solve quadratic equation you remember the foil method and try and reverse this process. 
when you plug either your answers back into the original equation they both must work. this might seem like lot work right now but after trying few examples will lot easier quickly recognize patterns and much more quickly. the key practice practice practice. 
terms edit 

factor 
find all the factors number other mathematical object the objects that divide evenly. 

quadratic 
quadratic polynomial function equation. 

degree 
the sum the exponents term the order polynomial. 

example edit 

for example can factored yielding give feedback this content 
register for free remove ads and unlock more features learn more 
full text edit 

solving quadratic equations factoring 

quadratic equation polynomial equation the second degree. general quadratic equation can written the form 



where represents variable unknown and and are constants with the equation linear equation. some plots quadratic functions are shown below. 


plots quadratic equations 

plots the realvalued quadratic function varying each coefficient separately. 
the constants and are called respectively the quadratic coefficient the linear coefficient and the constant term free term. the term quadratic comes from quadratus which the latin word for square. quadratic equations can solved factoring completing the square graphing newtons method and using the quadratic formula. 

solve quadratic equations factoring lets remember the foil property. foil acronym for the order which multiply out function. stands for first outer inner last. before jump into factoring out quadratic equation lets try foil function 



remembering this lets think about how need about factoring out quadratic equation. lets this using the same example 



the first step set the format 
now lets look how fill the variable slots this format. this need take the square root the first term find two terms that will multiply together the first term our quadratic. our example simple the square root lets input this into our format 
now lets look the constants put our equation. need have two numbers that add the coefficient our middle term and multiple together give the same product our last term. good way this make list all the numbers whose product the last term and make note what they add to. this example our last term lets make list all the numbers that multiply can easily see that the only option here that adds lets put this into our equation 
the last thing input the signs our equation. good thing remember that two negatives make positive. our last term has positive sign then both the signs our factored equation are the same. the last term has negative sign the one the equations will negative and one will positive. since have positive last term know that our equation going have the same signs both terms. since the middle term negative know that both our equations will have negative sign. now can complete the factored equation 
now really need multiply this back out and make sure makes sense. always check your work when factored out this returns the original equation know correct. 
now solve the equation set each term equal zero and and 
when you plug either these terms back into the original equation they both work. this might seem like lot work right now but after trying few examples will lot easier quickly recognize patterns and much more quickly. the key practice practice practice. 

factoring quadratics 

factoring quadratics finds the roots xintercepts quadratic equation. factoring quadratic equations standard form can often accomplished finding two numbers that add give and multiply give ac. more complicated equations use the quadratic formula completing the square methods. use the quadratic formula change the standard form the quadratic equation find the roots solving for and substitute into the form tocomplete the square change the standard form the quadratic equation where and and then solve for solving quadratic equations 

terminology 

quadratic equations equation that contains seconddegree term and term higher degree. 

the standard form quadratic equation quad.gif where are real numbers andequation image indicator steps for solving quadratic equations factoring 

write the equation standard form 

factor completely. 

apply the zero product rule setting each factor containing variable zero. then solve the linear equations step check. 

note most quadratic equations have solutions the solutions correspond the xintercepts the graph quadratic function. 

breaking is a form of break.

breaks is the plural of break.

if i am breaking functions, i break them into peices. if charlie wants to break something apart, he'll break it.